Add data-classification.md extension (#1317)
cloudevents/spec: cloudevents/extensions/data-classification.md

# Data Classification Extension

> CloudEvents may contain payload which is subjected to data protection

Reviewer: s/may/might/

regulations like GDPR or HIPAA. For intermediaries and consumers knowing how
event payload is classified, which data protection regulation applies and how
payload is categorized, enables compliant processing of an event.

This extension defines attributes to describe to
[consumers](../spec.md#consumer) or [intermediaries](../spec.md#intermediary)
how an event and its payload is classified, category of the payload and any
applicable data protection regulations.

> These attributes are intended for classification on an event and payload level
> and not on `data` field level. Classification on field level is best defined in
> the schema specified via the `dataschema` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These attributes are intended for classification at an event and payload level
and not at a `data` field level. Classification at a field level is best defined in
the schema specified via the `dataschema` attribute.
```

(I don't mind the on vs at much - this is more about introducing articles.)

## Notational Conventions

As with the main [CloudEvents specification](../spec.md), the key words "MUST",
"MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

However, the scope of these key words is limited to when this extension is used.
For example, an attribute being marked as "REQUIRED" does not mean it needs to
be in all CloudEvents, rather it needs to be included only when this extension
is being used.

## Attributes

### dataclassification

- Type: `String`
- Description: Data classification level for the event payload within the
  context of a `dataregulation`. Typical labels are: `public`, `internal`,

>   `confidential`, `restricted`.

Reviewer: I suspect these values are probably defined by the data regulations being adhered to, but since `dataregulation` is optional, should this spec define some recommended values for cases where it's missing to provide some consistency?

Author: Yes I feel that is a good approach. I did not want to make the `dataregulation` attribute required as I feel this is supportive information and not directly mandatory for processing. My intent is that usage of this extension should be as light as possible, meaning less required attributes as possible.

What do you think of:

_Description: Data classification level for the event payload within the context of a `dataregulation`. In a situation where `dataregulation` is undefined, recommended labels are: `public`, `internal`, `confidential`,  or `restricted`._

- Constraints:
  - REQUIRED

>   - SHOULD be applicable to data protection regulation.

Reviewer: Can you elaborate on what this "SHOULD" means? What does someone need to do (from a coding perspective) to adhere to this "SHOULD"?

Author: The SHOULD statement is merely meant as an indication towards _event producers_ that the data classification label should have its origin within the applicable data-regulation. But maybe this is stating the obvious and from a coding perspective not relevant.  Being already stated in the _description_, it does not add value. I will remove it

### dataregulation

- Type: `String`
- Description: A comma-delimited list of applicable data protection regulations.
  For example: `GDPR`, `HIPAA`, `PCI-DSS`, `ISO-27001`, `NIST-800-53`, `CCPA`.
- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL
  - if present, MUST be a non-empty string

### datacategory

- Type: `String`
- Description: Data category of the event payload within the context of a
  `dataregulation` and `dataclassification`. For GDPR personal data typical  
  labels are: `non-sensitive`, `standard`, `sensitive`, `special-category`. For
  US personal data this could be: `sensitive-pii`, `non-sensitive-pii`,
  `non-pii`. And for personal health information under HIPAA: `phi`.
- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL
  - if present, MUST be a non-empty string
  - SHOULD be applicable to data regulation and classification.

## Usage

When this extension is used, producers MUST set the value of the
`dataclassification` attribute. When applicable the `dataregulation` and
`datacategory` attributes MAY be set to provide additional details on the
classification context.

> Intermediaries and consumers SHOULD take these attributes into account and act

Reviewer: I wonder if this "SHOULD" should be a "MUST" instead? Should a consumer reject a request if it can't meet the data regulation requirements? Are clients expecting some kind of guarantee? Meaning, a non-error means "yup, got it and it'll be protected appropriately".  Although, extensions can be ignored... maybe it would need to be worded like: "If an implementation supports this extension, then it MUST reject the event if it can not adhere to the requirements of the specified data classification attributes" ??

Reviewer 2: This raises an interesting possibility, which is too late for v1 but could be interesting in a future version: if an event could say "consumers/intermediaries must understand extensions x, y and z, and must otherwise reject/ignore the event" then we could be stricter. (So that would be an attribute that's part of the main spec, but the values of which would be names of extension attributes.)

Author: Yes changing this section to be more prescriptive towards consumers is warranted. When an implementation supports this extension, an event MUST be handled in a compliant manner or otherwise MUST be rejected/ignored. 

I will adjust the phrasing.

accordingly to data regulations and/or internal policies when processing the
event and payload.

> Intermediaries SHOULD NOT modify the `dataclassification`, `dataregulation`, and

Reviewer 2: Is a redacting intermediary a valid use case? (I'm guessing not - that they'd end up effectively being a new event producer, as it's no longer the same event really if a bunch of information has been removed. But I thought I'd mention it as a possibility.)

Author: I agree that when an intermediary changes an event or payload it becomes a new event. Than also the role of the intermediary shifts to that of event producer and it has responsibility/freedom to define the classification attributes.

# Data Classification Extension

> CloudEvents might contain payload which is subjected to data protection

Reviewer: s/payload/payloads/  & s/is/are/
or
s/payload/a payload/
but I prefer the formet

regulations like GDPR or HIPAA. For intermediaries and consumers knowing how
event payload is classified, which data protection regulation applies and how

> payload is categorized, enables compliant processing of an event.

Reviewer: s/payload is/payloads are/

how an event and its payload is classified, category of the payload and any
applicable data protection regulations.

These attributes are intended for classification at an event and payload level
and not at a `data` field level. Classification at a field level is best defined
in the schema specified via the `dataschema` attribute.

## Notational Conventions

As with the main [CloudEvents specification](../spec.md), the key words "MUST",
"MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

However, the scope of these key words is limited to when this extension is used.
For example, an attribute being marked as "REQUIRED" does not mean it needs to
be in all CloudEvents, rather it needs to be included only when this extension
is being used.

## Attributes

### dataclassification

- Type: `String`
- Description: Data classification level for the event payload within the
  context of a `dataregulation`. In situations where `dataregulation` is
  undefined or the data protection regulation does not define any labels, then

>   recommended labels are: `public`, `internal`, `confidential`, or

Reviewer: s/recommended/RECOMMENDED/

  `restricted`.
- Constraints:
  - REQUIRED

### dataregulation

- Type: `String`
- Description: A comma-delimited list of applicable data protection regulations.
  For example: `GDPR`, `HIPAA`, `PCI-DSS`, `ISO-27001`, `NIST-800-53`, `CCPA`.
- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL

>   - if present, MUST be a non-empty string

Reviewer: anal but... since it's a string with commas that need to be parsed, we may want to add something like "leading and trailing spaces around each entry MUST be ignored. Spaces within an entry MAY exist but MUST be reduced down to a single space for comparison purposes".  Are spaces allowed in the entries?

Reviewer 3: Correct spaces are not allowed

  labels are: `non-sensitive`, `standard`, `sensitive`, `special-category`. For
  US personal data this could be: `sensitive-pii`, `non-sensitive-pii`,
  `non-pii`. And for personal health information under HIPAA: `phi`.
- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL
  - if present, MUST be a non-empty string

## Usage

When this extension is used, producers MUST set the value of the
`dataclassification` attribute. When applicable the `dataregulation` and
`datacategory` attributes MAY be set to provide additional details on the
classification context.

When an implementation supports this extension, then intermediaries and
consumers MUST take these attributes into account and act accordingly to data
regulations and/or internal policies in processing the event and payload. If
intermediaries or consumers cannot meet such requirements, they MUST reject or
ignore the event.

Intermediaries SHOULD NOT modify the `dataclassification`, `dataregulation`, and
`datacategory` attributes.

## Use cases

Examples where data classification of events can be useful are:

- When an event contains PII or restricted information and therefore processing

>   by intermediaries or consumers MUST adhere to certain policies. For example

Reviewer: s/MUST/need to/   since this isn't a normative section, it's just examples.

in the schema specified via the `dataschema` attribute.

## Notational Conventions

As with the main [CloudEvents specification](../spec.md), the key words "MUST",
"MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
"RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in [RFC 2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119).

However, the scope of these key words is limited to when this extension is used.
For example, an attribute being marked as "REQUIRED" does not mean it needs to
be in all CloudEvents, rather it needs to be included only when this extension
is being used.

## Attributes

### dataclassification

- Type: `String`
- Description: Data classification level for the event payload within the
  context of a `dataregulation`. In situations where `dataregulation` is
  undefined or the data protection regulation does not define any labels, then
  RECOMMENDED labels are: `public`, `internal`, `confidential`, or
  `restricted`.
- Constraints:
  - REQUIRED

### dataregulation

- Type: `String`
- Description: A comma-delimited list of applicable data protection regulations.

>   For example: `GDPR`, `HIPAA`, `PCI-DSS`, `ISO-27001`, `NIST-800-53`, `CCPA`.

Reviewer 4: I realize this potentially goes down a rabbit-hole of trying to maintain catalogs but is there value is formalizing some of the regulation codes or referencing some well-known external catalog (if one exists).

In addition, does the applicability of some of these regulations vary by jurisdiction?  if so, does that need to be represented in some fashion ?

Author: 1. 
I have been searching for catalog of data protection regulations, but I could not find a definitive source which also standardizes regulation codes. The best open source (outside some commercial legal websites) is that of [UNCTAD - Data Protection and Privacy Legislation Worldwide](https://unctad.org/page/data-protection-and-privacy-legislation-worldwide). Here an interactive overview and Excel [dataset](https://unctad.org/system/files/information-document/DP.xlsx) of cyber-laws (incl. data protection and privacy) across the world is provided. However, this does not define any (standardized) regulation codes.

I would not want to go that far of deriving and maintaining a catalog of data regulation codes. For often referenced regulations (or standards) of countries/regions, de facto abbreviations are available, so in my view that could suffice. Would a small appendix with commonly used regulation codes including a reference to UNCTAD website be useful?

Overall, I see this usage of this attribute like other context attributes like `source` and `subject`. The semantics of the values are based upon mutual understanding between producer and consumer and I feel this extension should not be to prescriptive.

2.
Unsure about the applicability question. I think this can vary per regulation/country. For example, in the case of GDPR, this regulation is applicable for organizations within EU countries but also for organizations outside of EU countries when targeting EU citizens. I doubt if this must be represented in some attribute and what direct value this adds. In my view, it is an agreement between producers and consumers of CloudEvents on how a data-classification label and applicable regulation is interpreted and how this influences processing. I would not want to define this much to more detail in this extension.

Reviewer: @JemDay any thoughts on Rob's reply? I'd like to see if we can close this one out by next week (our last call this year).

Author: @JemDay would this be helpful or too much?
-------------------------

## Appendix Data Protection and Privacy Regulations

A catalog of common data protection and privacy regulation and abbreviations 
based upon UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) 
information. As UNCTAD itself does not define any abbreviations, this 
is a non-exhaustive derivative list of most common regulations. For more 
information see [UNCTAD Data Protection and Privacy Legislation Worldwide](https://unctad.org/page/data-protection-and-privacy-legislation-worldwide).

| Region | Abbreviation | Full Name | Country |
|--------|--------------|-----------|---------|
| Africa | POPIA | Protection of Personal Information Act | South Africa |
| Africa | NDPR | Nigeria Data Protection Regulation | Nigeria |
| Africa | DPA-KE | Data Protection Act | Kenya |
| Africa | PDPL | Personal Data Protection Law | Egypt |
| Africa | GDPL | General Data Protection Law | Tunisia |
| Americas | LGPD | Lei Geral de Proteção de Dados | Brazil |
| Americas | LPDP | Ley de Protección de Datos Personales | Mexico |
| Americas | LOCDI | Ley Orgánica de Datos Personales | Argentina |
| Americas | CCPA | California Consumer Privacy Act | United States |
| Americas | CPRA | California Privacy Rights Act | United States |
| Americas | PIPEDA | Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act | Canada |
| Americas | VCDPA | Virginia Consumer Data Protection Act | United States |
| Americas | CPA | Colorado Privacy Act | United States |
| Americas | UCPA | Utah Consumer Privacy Act | United States |
| Asia-Pacific | PDPA | Personal Data Protection Act | Singapore |
| Asia-Pacific | PIPA | Personal Information Protection Act | South Korea |
| Asia-Pacific | APPI | Act on the Protection of Personal Information | Japan |
| Asia-Pacific | DPDP | Personal Data Protection Bill | India |
| Asia-Pacific | PDPO | Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance | Hong Kong |
| Asia-Pacific | DPA-MY | Data Protection Act | Malaysia |
| Asia-Pacific | PIPL | Personal Information Protection Law | China |
| Asia-Pacific | DPA-ID | Draft Data Protection Act | Indonesia |
| Europe | GDPR | General Data Protection Regulation | European Union |
| Middle East | PDPL | Personal Data Protection Law | Saudi Arabia |
| Middle East | PDPO | Personal Data Protection Ordinance | United Arab Emirates |
| Middle East | PDPD | Personal Data Protection Draft | Bahrain |
| Global/Multi-Regional | APEC-CBPR | Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Cross Border Privacy Rules | International |
| Global/Multi-Regional | ISO-27001 | Information Security Management | International |
| Global/Multi-Regional | ISO-27701 | Privacy Information Management | International |
| Industry-Specific | HIPAA | Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act | United States |
| Industry-Specific | PCI-DSS | Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard | United States |
| Industry-Specific | NIST-800-53 | National Institute of Standards and Technology Framework | United States |

- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL
  - if present, MUST be a non-empty string without internal spaces. Leading and
    trailing spaces around each entry MUST be ignored.

### datacategory

- Type: `String`
- Description: Data category of the event payload within the context of a
  `dataregulation` and `dataclassification`. For GDPR personal data typical  
  labels are: `non-sensitive`, `standard`, `sensitive`, `special-category`. For
  US personal data this could be: `sensitive-pii`, `non-sensitive-pii`,
  `non-pii`. And for personal health information under HIPAA: `phi`.
- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL
  - if present, MUST be a non-empty string

## Usage

When this extension is used, producers MUST set the value of the
`dataclassification` attribute. When applicable the `dataregulation` and
`datacategory` attributes MAY be set to provide additional details on the
classification context.

When an implementation supports this extension, then intermediaries and
consumers MUST take these attributes into account and act accordingly to data
regulations and/or internal policies in processing the event and payload. If

> intermediaries or consumers cannot meet such requirements, they MUST reject or

Reviewer 2: What should a client do if they know "support" this extension, but see values they don't know about (e.g. a new dataregulation value)? We may want to adjust this to say "if you don't know you can meet requirements, you should assume you can't".

Reviewer 3: Agree, I will adjust the phrasing to make this more explicit.

Reviewer: @jskeet you ok with the latest edits for this comment?

Reviewer 2: I'll *try* to look tomorrow, but no guarantees I'm afraid.

Reviewer 2: Right, checked now, and this works for me.

  `dataregulation` and `dataclassification`. For GDPR personal data typical  
  labels are: `non-sensitive`, `standard`, `sensitive`, `special-category`. For
  US personal data this could be: `sensitive-pii`, `non-sensitive-pii`,
  `non-pii`. And for personal health information under HIPAA: `phi`.
- Constraints:
  - OPTIONAL
  - if present, MUST be a non-empty string

## Usage

When this extension is used, producers MUST set the value of the
`dataclassification` attribute. When applicable the `dataregulation` and
`datacategory` attributes MAY be set to provide additional details on the
classification context.

When an implementation supports this extension, then intermediaries and
consumers MUST take these attributes into account and act accordingly to data
regulations and/or internal policies in processing the event and payload. If
intermediaries or consumers cannot meet such requirements, they MUST reject or
ignore the event.

If intermediaries or consumers are unsure on how to interpret these attributes,
for example when they encounter an unknown classification level or data
regulation, they MUST assume they cannot meet requirements and MUST reject or

> ignore the event.

Author: I can follow that generating an error would be a more response. I will re-phrase this. 

For my clarity you are you referring to [primer.md#protocol-error-handling](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/cloudevents/primer.md#protocol-error-handling)?

> ignore the event.

Reviewer: yup
